The President:
Over the past two years, more than seven million Americans
have lost their jobs.
Countless businesses have been
forced to shut their doors.
Few families have escaped the
pain of this terrible recession.
And rarely does a day go by that I don't hear from folks who are hurt.
That's why we have pushed so
hard to rebuild this economy.
But even as we work tirelessly
to dig our way out of this hole,
it's important that we address
what led us into such a deep
mess in the first place.
Much of the turmoil of this
recession was caused by the
irresponsibility of banks and
financial institutions on Wall Street.
These financial firms took huge,
reckless risks in pursuit of
short-term profits
and soaring bonuses.
They gambled with
borrowed money,
without enough oversight or
regard for the consequences.
And when they lost,
they lost big.
Little more than a year ago,
many of the largest and oldest
financial firms in the world
teetered on the brink of
collapse, overwhelmed by
the consequences of their
irresponsible decisions.
This financial crisis nearly
pulled the entire economy into a
second Great Depression.
As a result, the
American people --
struggling in their own right -- were placed in a deeply unfair
and unsatisfying position.
Even though these financial
firms were largely facing a
crisis of their own making, their failure could've led to an
even greater calamity for
the country as a whole.
And that's why the previous
administration started a program
-- the Troubled Asset
Relief Program, or TARP --
to provide these financial
institutions with funds to
survive the turmoil that
they had helped unleash.
It was a distasteful but
necessary thing to do.
Now, many originally feared that
most of the $700 billion in TARP
money would be lost forever.
But when my administration
came into office,
we put in place rigorous
rules for accountability and
transparency, which cut
the costs of the bailout dramatically.
We've now recovered most of the money we provided to the banks.
That's good news, but
as far as I'm concerned,
it's not good enough.
We want the taxpayers'
money back -- all of it --
and we're going to
collect every dime.
That's why, this week, I
proposed a new fee on major
financial firms to compensate
the American people for the
extraordinary assistance they
provided to the financial industry.
And the fee would be in place
until the American taxpayer is made whole.
Only the largest financial firms
with more than $50 billion in
assets will be affected,
not community banks.
And the bigger the firm --
and the more debt it holds --
the larger the fee.
Because we are not only going to
recover our money and help close
our deficits; we are going
to attack some of the banking
practices that
led to the crisis.
That's important.
The fact is, financial firms
play an essential role in our economy.
They provide capital and credit
to families purchasing homes,
students attending college,
businesses looking to start up
or expand.
That's critical
to our recovery.
That's why our goal
with this fee --
and with the common-sense
financial reforms we seek --
is not to punish the
financial industry.
Our goal is to prevent the abuse
and excess that nearly led to
its collapse.
Our goal is to promote fair
dealings while punishing those
who game the system; to
encourage sustained growth while
discouraging the speculative
bubbles that inevitably burst.
Ultimately, that's in the
shared interest of the financial
industry and the
American people.
And of course, I would like the
banks to embrace this sense of
mutual responsibility.
So far, though, they have
ferociously fought financial reform.
The industry has even joined
forces with the opposition party
to launch a massive lobbying
campaign against common-sense
rules to protect consumers
and prevent another crisis.
Now, like clockwork, the banks
and the politicians who curry
their favor are already trying to stop this fee from going into effect.
The very same firms reaping
billions of dollars in profits,
and reportedly handing out
more money in bonuses and
compensation than ever
before in history,
are now pleading poverty.
It's a sight to see.
Those who oppose this fee say
the banks can't afford to pay
back the American people without
passing on the costs to their
shareholders and customers.
But that's hard to believe when
there are reports that Wall
Street is going to hand out
more money in bonuses and
compensation just this year than
the cost of this fee over the
next ten years.
If the big financial firms
can afford massive bonuses,
they can afford to pay
back the American people.
Those who oppose this fee have
also had the audacity to suggest
that it's somehow unfair.
That because these firms have
already returned what they
borrowed directly, their
obligation is fulfilled.
But this willfully ignores the
fact that the entire industry
benefited not only
from the bailout,
but from the assistance extended to AIG and to homeowners,
and from the many unprecedented
emergency actions taken by the
Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and
others to prevent a financial collapse.
And it ignores a far greater
unfairness: sticking the
American taxpayer with the bill.
That's unacceptable to me,
and to the American people.
We are not going to let Wall
Street take the money and run.
We're going to pass
this fee into law.
And I'm going to continue
to work with Congress on
common-sense financial reforms
to protect people and the
economy from the kind of costly
and painful crisis we've just been through.
Because after a very
tough two years,
after a crisis that has
caused so much havoc,
if there is one lesson
that we can learn,
it's this: we cannot return
to business as usual.
Thanks very much.